theseus was now fifty years old as hellanicus states when he carried
off helen who was yet too young to be married  some writers to take
away this accusation of one of the greatest crimes laid to his charge
say that he did not steal away helen himself but that idas and lynceus
were the ravishers who brought her to him and committed her to his
charge and that therefore he refused to restore her at the demand of
castor and pollux or indeed they say her own father tyndarus had
sent her to be kept by him for fear of enarophorus the son of
hippocoon who would have carried her away by force when she was yet a
child  but the most probable account and that which has most witnesses
on its side is this  theseus and pirithous went both together to
sparta and having seized the young lady as she was dancing in the
temple of diana orthia fled away with her  there were presently men in
arms sent to pursue but they followed no further than to tegea and
theseus and pirithous being now out of danger having passed through
peloponnesus made an agreement between themselves that he to whom the
lot should fall should have helen to his wife but should be obliged to
assist in procuring another for his friend  the lot fell upon theseus
who conveyed her to aphidnae not being yet marriageable and delivered
her to one of his allies called aphidnus and having sent his mother
aethra after to take care of her desired him to keep them so secretly
that none might know where they were which done to return the same
service to his friend pirithous he accompanied him in his journey to
epirus in order to steal away the king of the molossians daughter
the king his own name being aidoneus or pluto called his wife
proserpina and his daughter cora and a great dog which he kept
cerberus with whom he ordered all that came as suitors to his daughter
to fight and promised her to him that should overcome the beast  but
having been informed that the design of pirithous and his companion was
not to court his daughter but to force her away he caused them both to
be seized and threw pirithous to be torn in pieces by his dog and put
theseus into prison and kept him
