but i shall be asked why do people delight in continually conversing
with you i have told you already athenians the whole truth about this
matter they like to hear the crossexamination of the pretenders to
wisdom there is amusement in it now this duty of crossexamining other
men has been imposed upon me by god and has been signified to me by
oracles visions and in every way in which the will of divine power was
ever intimated to any one this is true o athenians or if not true
would be soon refuted if i am or have been corrupting the youth those
of them who are now grown up and have become sensible that i gave them
bad advice in the days of their youth should come forward as accusers
and take their revenge or if they do not like to come themselves some
of their relatives fathers brothers or other kinsmen should say what
evil their families have suffered at my hands now is their time many
of them i see in the court there is crito who is of the same age and
of the same deme with myself and there is critobulus his son whom i
also see then again there is lysanias of sphettus who is the father of
aeschineshe is present and also there is antiphon of cephisus who is
the father of epigenes and there are the brothers of several who have
associated with me there is nicostratus the son of theosdotides and
the brother of theodotus now theodotus himself is dead and therefore
he at any rate will not seek to stop him and there is paralus the
son of demodocus who had a brother theages and adeimantus the son of
ariston whose brother plato is present and aeantodorus who is the
brother of apollodorus whom i also see i might mention a great many
others some of whom meletus should have produced as witnesses in
the course of his speech and let him still produce them if he has
forgotteni will make way for him and let him say if he has any
testimony of the sort which he can produce nay athenians the very
opposite is the truth for all these are ready to witness on behalf of
the corrupter of the injurer of their kindred as meletus and anytus
call me not the corrupted youth onlythere might have been a motive
for thatbut their uncorrupted elder relatives why should they too
support me with their testimony why indeed except for the sake of
truth and justice and because they know that i am speaking the truth
and that meletus is a liar
