so saying she went her way and left him there vexed in spirit for the
fairgirdled womans sake whom they had taken perforce despite his
will and meanwhile odysseus came to chryse with the holy hecatomb when
they were now entered within the deep haven they furled their sails and
laid them in the black ship and lowered the mast by the forestays and
brought it to the crutch with speed and rowed her with oars to the
anchorage then they cast out the mooring stones and made fast the
hawsers and so themselves went forth on to the seabeach and forth
they brought the hecatomb for the fardarter apollo and forth came
chryseis withal from the seafaring ship then odysseus of many counsels
brought her to the altar and gave her into her fathers arms and spake
unto him chryses agamemnon king of men sent me hither to bring thee
thy daughter and to offer to phoebus a holy hecatomb on the danaans
behalf wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought sorrow
and lamentation on the argives

so saying he gave her to his arms and he gladly took his dear child
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
wellbuilded altar next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal then chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them
hearken to me god of the silver bow that standest over chryse and holy
killa and rulest tenedos with might even as erst thou heardest my
prayer and didst me honour and mightily afflictest the people of the
achaians even so now fulfil me this my desire remove thou from the
danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence

so spake he in prayer and phoebus apollo heard him now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal first they drew back the victims
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat making a double fold and laid raw
collops thereon and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine and at his side the young men in
their hands held fivepronged forks now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals then sliced they all the rest and pierced it
through with spits and roasted it carefully and drew all off again so
when they had rest from the task and had made ready the banquet they
feasted nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair banquet but when
they had put away from them the desire of meat and drink the young men
crowned the bowls with wine and gave each man his portion after the
drinkoffering had been poured into the cups so all day long worshipped
they the god with music singing the beautiful paean the sons of the
achaians making music to the fardarter or the averter of
pestilence and his heart was glad to hear and when the sun went down
and darkness came on them they laid them to sleep beside the ships
hawsers and when rosyfingered dawn appeared the child of morning
then set they sail for the wide camp of the achaians and apollo the
fardarter sent them a favouring gale they set up their mast and spread
the white sails forth and the wind filled the sails belly and the dark
wave sang loud about the stem as the ship made way and she sped across
the wave accomplishing her journey so when they were now come to the
wide camp of the achaians they drew up their black ship to land high
upon the sands and set in line the long props beneath her and
themselves were scattered amid their huts and ships

but he sat by his swiftfaring ships still wroth even the heavensprung
son of peleus achilles fleet of foot he betook him neither to the
assembly that is the heros glory neither to war but consumed his
heart in tarrying in his place and yearned for the warcry and for
battle

now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come then the gods that are
for ever fared to olympus all in company led of zeus and thetis forgat
not her sons charge but rose up from the seawave and at early morn
mounted up to great heaven and olympus there found she kronos son of
the farsounding voice sitting apart from all on the topmost peak of
manyridged olympus so she sat before his face and with her left hand
clasped his knees and with her right touched him beneath his chin and
spake in prayer to king zeus son of kronos father zeus if ever i gave
thee aid amid the immortal gods whether by word or deed fulfil thou
this my desire do honour to my son that is doomed to earliest death of
all men now hath agamemnon king of men done him dishonour for he hath
taken away his meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed
but honour thou him zeus of olympus lord of counsel grant thou
victory to the trojans the while until the achaians do my son honour and
exalt him with recompense

so spake she but zeus the cloudgatherer said no word to her and sat
long time in silence but even as thetis had clasped his knees so held
she by him clinging and questioned him yet a second time promise me
now this thing verily and bow thy head thereto or else deny me seeing
there is naught for thee to fear that i may know full well how i among
all gods am least in honour

then zeus the cloudgatherer sore troubled spake to her verily it is
a sorry matter if thou wilt set me at variance with hera wheneer she
provoketh me with taunting words even now she upbraideth me ever amid
the immortal gods and saith that i aid the trojans in battle but do
thou now depart again lest hera mark aught and i will take thought for
these things to fulfil them come now i will bow my head to thee that
thou mayest be of good courage for that of my part is the surest
token amid the immortals no word of mine is revocable nor false nor
unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it

kronion spake and bowed his dark brow and the ambrosial locks waved
from the kings immortal head and he made great olympus quake

thus the twain took counsel and parted she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering olympus and zeus fared to his own palace all
the gods in company arose from their seats before their fathers face
neither ventured any to await his coming but stood up all before him
so he sate him there upon his throne but hera saw and was not ignorant
how that the daughter of the ancient of the sea thetis the
silverfooted had devised counsel with him anon with taunting words
spake she to zeus the son of kronos now who among the gods thou
crafty of mind hath devised counsel with thee it is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest
